In this section, we’re going to talk about
measuring the magnetic field. A simple and
familiar type of magnetic field sensor is
the magnetic compass. The compass was discovered
by the Chinese over 2,000 years ago. It contains
a magnetized needle that aligns with the
Earth’s magnetic field. The Earth rotates
about an axis that passes through the North
and South geographic poles. The Earth itself
is a gigantic magnet and the North and South
poles of the magnet do not correspond to the
North and South geographic poles of the Earth.
We can imagine the magnetic field lines from
this giant internal magnet passing out of
the surface of the planet, arcing through
space, and then diving back in to the ground
at the North magnetic pole.
The red arrow that I’m holding represents
approximately one of the Earth’s magnetic
field lines. We can think of these as imaginary
lines which come out of the Earth, arc through
the sky and land again at the North Pole of
the planet. Now, I have aligned this arrow
by measuring the three components of the Earth’s
magnetic field using my phone. And, at the
moment, the way I have this arrow and the phone
oriented, the only component of magnetic field
that’s non zero is in the Y direction, that’s
the, this direction on my, on my phone.
The magnetic poles of the Earth are constantly
moving and that’s a bit problematic for
a sensor like a compass which points at the
magnetic poles. We need to understand something
about where the magnetic poles are with respect
to the geographic poles and how they are moving.
The needle of a compass points towards the
Magnetic North Pole of the planet. But, true
North or geographic North is in a different
direction. Here, we have a right-handed coordinate
frame where the axes are pointing to geographic
North, geographic East and vertically down
toward the center of the planet. Imagine now
a plane that contains the magnetic field vector
which is denoted by a red arrow and the symbol B.
Angle between this plane and the geographic
North direction is the magnetic declination angle D.
This diagram shows magnetic declination for
the year 2010 and we can see that it varies
quite significantly across the planet. Magnetic
North can be up to plus or minus 20 degrees
away from true North. These values become
quite extreme in the vicinity of the South
Magnetic Pole which we can see very clearly
here. If you’re sailing a boat and you’re
using a nautical chart, the appropriate magnetic
declination is typically marked somewhere
on that chart. Magnetic declination varies
over time and this fascinating video shows the contour lines of magnetic declination
varying over periods of hundreds of years.
The magnetic field lines are generally not parallel to the surface of the Earth.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the magnetic field lines
come out of the ground. And, in the Northern
Hemisphere, the magnetic field lines disappear
into the ground. So, we can introduce another
angle which is referred to as magnetic inclination
denoted typically by the symbol I and that
represents the angle of the magnetic field
line with respect to the surface of the Earth.
And, this is a map of magnetic inclination
over the surface of the planet. The sign convention
used is Northern Hemisphere centric. So, if
the magnetic field line is descending in to
the ground, the inclination angle is considered
to be positive. Here is another chart and
this one shows the strength of the magnetic
field, the magnitude of the magnetic field
vector and this is units of nano teslas. That’s
10 to the minus 9 Tesla. For comparison, a
modern MRI machine has a magnetic field strength
of around 4 to 8 Tesla. That’s a hundred
thousand times stronger than the magnetic
field strength of the Earth.